Prim's algorithm is a greedy algorithm used to find the Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) of a connected weighted graph. The MST is a subset of the edges of the graph that connects all the vertices with the minimum total edge weight.

The steps involved in Prim's algorithm are as follows:

Initialize an empty set MST to store the edges of the MST and a set visited to keep track of the visited vertices.

Choose an arbitrary vertex v as the starting vertex. Add v to the visited set.

Repeat the following steps until all vertices are visited:

a. Find the minimum weight edge e that connects a visited vertex to an unvisited vertex.

b. Add e to the MST set.

c. Add the unvisited vertex connected by e to the visited set.

Once all vertices are visited, the MST set will contain the edges of the MST.

Here's a step-by-step explanation of the algorithm using an example graph:

scss
// Example graph:
      4
  (0)---(1)
  |     / |
  |   /   | 2
  | /     |
  (2)---(3)
     3
Choose vertex 0 as the starting vertex and add it to the visited set.

Find the minimum weight edge. In this case, it's the edge (0, 1) with weight 4. Add this edge to the MST set.

makefile

MST: (0, 1)
visited: {0, 1}
Find the next minimum weight edge. The possible edges are (0, 2) with weight 3 and (1, 3) with weight 2. Choose the edge (1, 3) with weight 2. Add this edge to the MST set.
makefile

MST: (0, 1), (1, 3)
visited: {0, 1, 3}
Find the next minimum weight edge. The only remaining edge is (0, 2) with weight 3. Add this edge to the MST set.
makefile


MST: (0, 1), (1, 3), (0, 2)
visited: {0, 1, 2, 3}
All vertices are now visited. The MST set contains the edges (0, 1), (1, 3), and (0, 2), which form the MST of the given graph.
Prim's algorithm ensures that the MST is always connected and has the minimum total weight. It achieves this by greedily selecting the minimum weight edge at each step, connecting the visited and unvisited vertices with the least cost.

Note: Prim's algorithm can be implemented using a priority queue or a min-heap data structure to efficiently select the minimum weight edge at each step. The time complexity of Prim's algorithm is O(E log V), where E is the number of edges and V is the number of vertices in the graph.